#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass elsarticle
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine natbib_authoryear
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Fertility and Agriculture Production: Instrumental Variable Evidence from
 Uganda
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Bjorn Van Campenhout and Haruna Sekabira
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The relationship between well-being and fertility 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "RePEc:ecj:econjl:v:105:y:1995:i:433:p:1415-34"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In poor, agricultural based societies, at least part of the correlation
 between household size and well-being works through agricultural productivity.
 For instance, larger households may mean more cheap labour is available
 that does not suffer from moral hazard problems of hired labour.
 But higher fertility may also mean that women have less time to devote
 to agricultural production.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Uganda has one of the highest fertility rates in the world and a substantial
 part of the population lives in rural areas making a living out of semi-subsist
ance agriculture.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this study, we will investigate the effect of fertility on agricultural
 production at the household level.
 In particular, we will look at the effect of the number of biological children
 on household member labour input, as well as a range of productivity measures
 for different crops.
 Our identification strategy is a simple but powerful instrumetal variables
 approach inspired by the work of 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "RePEc:aea:aecrev:v:88:y:1998:i:3:p:450-77"

\end_inset

.
 We use the fact that male ofsprings are prefered in conservative patriarchal
 societies to construct a range of instruments.
 The exogenous variation in the sex of a child can then be used to determine
 the exogenous component of household size.
 Such a two stage least squares approach is expected to yield consistent
 estimates for the causal effect of fertility on agricultural production
 within the household.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This article is organized as follows.
 The next section looks at related studies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Related Studies
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The effect of household size on well-being is probably most developed in
 the area of labour economics.
 Since this literature is so extensive, we only mention two of the most
 influential works here.
 The first is 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "RePEc:aea:aecrev:v:88:y:1998:i:3:p:450-77"

\end_inset

 that tries to quantify the effect of fertility on female labour supply
 in the US.
 They deal with the endogeneity of the number of children women have by
 exploiting the fact that Americans tend to prefer mixed sibling-sex in
 their household.
 They argue that parents of same-sex siblings are significantly and substantiall
y more likely to go on to have an additional child.
 They find that more children does indeed reduce labour force pariticipation
 of women, but the effect is less pronounced than previous studies suggested.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another paper that tries to answer the same question is 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "RePEc:ucp:jpolec:v:88:y:1980:i:2:p:328-48"

\end_inset

.
 In this paper, the exogenous variation in the number of children is obtained
 by using the occurence of multiple births (twins) at first birth as an
 instrument.
 The authors argue that the comparison between women who gave birth to a
 single child at first birth and women who gave birth to twins at first
 birth teases out the causal effect of related to an extra child.
 Since the occurence of twins is exogenous, there is no danger that heterogenity
 in women preferences contaminates the estimated coefficients.
 The study finds that household size reduces female labour supply, but the
 effect is only temporary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "RePEc:ecj:econjl:v:105:y:1995:i:433:p:1415-34"

\end_inset

 focus more on the consumption side effects of household size in a developing
 country context.
 They note the contradiction between widely held views that larger households
 are often poorer and scale economies in consumption.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Data and Descriptive Statistics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "fertility"
options "plainnat"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
