#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Fertility, Household Labor Supply and Agricultural Production - Instrumental
 Variable Evidence from Uganda
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Bjorn Van Campenhout
\end_layout

\begin_layout Address
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) - Kampala - Plot 15,
 East Naguru Road, Po Box 28565 - Kampala - Uganda - b.vancampenhout@cgiar.org
 - +256 790 833729
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Keywords: fertility, instrumental variables, household labour supply, agricultur
e, Uganda.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
JEL codes: J13, J22, Q12
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Fertility is likely to affect agricultural production through its effect
 on household labor supply.
 Using the fact that in traditional, patriarchal societies sons are preferred
 to girls, we isolate exogenous variation in the number of children born
 to the mother and related it to labor supply and production outcomes in
 Uganda, a country that combines a dominant agricultural sector with one
 of the highest fertility rates in the world.
 We find that fertility has a strong negative effect on hours worked by
 the mother in the field.
 We also find some evidence of a negative effect for the father, but the
 size of the effect is only half that of the women.
 There is no effect on child labour.
 Households with lower fertility devote significantly more time to land
 preparation and weeding.
 This results in the fact that larger households grow less matooke and sweet
 potatoes.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
